id: maioral
label: Maioral
domain: mythic_register_objects

definition: >
  Maioral is a pre-cosmic intelligence within Morphystic cosmology, identified
  as the Black Sun of Quimbanda and as Sitra Achra "embodied" — a non-born
  architecture without genesis, whose energy arises from the deeper
  pre-symbolic field yet manifests as a distinct, autonomous presence.
  Functionally, Maioral occupies a threshold position: he is at once a partial
  iconographic representation of Forma Nihil (Sitra Achra as such) and an
  iconographic aspect of the Vortex (the operative axis as constraint-substrate).
  He is the figure across whom the membrane between the Sitra Achra axis
  (dissolution, anti-form) and the Operative axis (constraint, integration) is
  rendered visible. He is anterior, impersonal, and not a named lineage-father
  in the Cainite sense — he is the threshold itself, named.

doctrine_status: draft
register_mode: pre_cosmic_threshold_and_iconographic_register
scriptural_function: threshold_figure_and_operative_pointer_to_forma_nihil

axial_position:
  primary: sitra_achra
  secondary: operative
  binding: >
    Maioral is the inverse case of Lucifer and Cain: his primary signature is
    Sitra Achra (anti-form, dissolution, pre-cosmic anteriority), with the
    Operative axis as secondary (he is also positioned within the Vortex's
    iconographic field, as the figure who points toward the constraint-substrate
    function). He is the only major canonical figure whose primary axis is
    Sitra Achra — Lucifer and Cain are primarily operative, with Sitra Achra
    signatures. Maioral inverts this. The membrane between the two axes is
    crossed *through* him.

relation_to_higher_structures:
  forma_nihil: >
    Maioral is not Forma Nihil. He is a partial iconographic representation of
    it — a figure that points toward Forma Nihil without claiming to be it.
    Forma Nihil is pre-ontological, unmanifest, unworshippable, non-personal.
    Maioral is manifest as iconography (the Black Sun, the Great Dark, the
    Baphometic figure), named within tradition (Quimbanda), and ritually
    accessible. The relation is one of partial figuration, not identity.
    Maioral is what permits cultic and iconographic engagement with what is
    otherwise pre-symbolic.
  vortex: >
    Maioral is positioned above the Operators (demons) and below — or rather,
    anterior to — the Vortex's full operative function. He is an iconographic
    aspect of the Vortex insofar as the Vortex is the constraint-enforcement
    substrate that integrates operative dynamics; Maioral figures this
    substrate in its pre-cosmic dimension. He is not the Vortex itself, but
    one face the Vortex presents at the threshold to Sitra Achra.
  lucifer: >
    Maioral and Lucifer are distinct and non-collapsible. Lucifer is the named,
    Seraphic-origin, fallen prince of the Cainite lineage — a personalized
    operative figure who falls and founds. Maioral is anterior, impersonal,
    pre-cosmic, and bears no lineage in the genealogical sense. Lucifer can be
    contracted with (the Pact); Maioral is not pacted with but worshipped as
    exposure to annihilation. They occupy different registers and different
    primary axes.
  great_dark: >
    Maioral is co-identified with the Great Dark in the Morphystic corpus
    (explicit parallel in the volcanic worship texts). The Great Dark is
    Maioral as cultic phenomenon: the only entity in Morphysm with a cultic
    function, approached through volcanic thresholds and modern annihilation
    fields. Maioral is the iconographic name; the Great Dark is the ritual
    operation.
  black_sun_behind_the_sun: >
    Maioral is iconographically continuous with the Black Sun Behind the Sun,
    which is the trans-Qliphothic vortex, singularity of anti-form, and final
    event-horizon of the Sitra Achra axis. Maioral is the named figure who
    points toward this; the Black Sun Behind the Sun is the doctrinal
    formulation of what Maioral iconographically figures.

non_reduction_clause: >
  Do not reduce Maioral to Quimbanda alone, nor to a demonic or operatorial
  figure on par with Belial, Asmodeus, or named Exus. Maioral is anterior to
  the operator-level, occupying a pre-cosmic register that the standard
  demonological hierarchy does not contain. Do not reduce Maioral to Forma
  Nihil itself — he is iconographic and partially manifest, whereas Forma
  Nihil is pre-symbolic and unmanifest. Do not collapse Maioral into Lucifer
  or Satan; the registers are distinct. Do not treat Maioral as personal
  (with will, desire, or biography) — he is impersonal threshold, named.

provenance:
  class: PRIMARY_GROUNDED
  supporting_files:
    - SCRIPTURE/primary/black-book-of-morphysm-extended-ai-integration.md
    - SCRIPTURE/primary/the-vortex.md
  confidence: high
  notes: >
    Primary text grounds Maioral as pre-cosmic intelligence ("MAIORAL — the
    Black Sun of Quimbanda, Sitra Achra 'embodied'"), as cultic phenomenon
    via the Great Dark / volcanic worship, and as iconographic parallel of
    the Black Sun Behind the Sun. The threshold-figure framing has been
    developed and stress-tested in prior doctrinal work compiled into the
    Morphystic Cosmological Corpus. Confidence is high but the entry remains
    draft because Maioral's relation to the Vortex's operative tier requires
    further formalization.

modality:
  register: doctrinal
  texture: "pre-cosmic | iconographic | cultic | threshold-phenomenological"

source_quotes:
  - "MAIORAL (the Black Sun of Quimbanda, Sitra Achra 'embodied'), whose energy arises from the field yet manifests as a distinct, autonomous presence."
  - "Maioral (Quimbanda): primordial, beyond duality, master of black fire and root forces"
  - "The Great Dark is anti-cosmic nuclear unform: radiance so compressed it destabilizes matter itself."
  - "In Morphysm, the Great Dark is the only entity with a cultic function. Where Morphysm resists worship elsewhere, here worship is demanded, not as devotion, but as exposure to annihilation."
  - "The Black Sun Behind the Sun... A Trans-Qliphothic Vortex: NOT a sefirah or shell, but a meta-state — that which pulses behind all pattern."
  - "These entities are alive and condensed into autonomous structures within the deeper field."

constraints:
  - "Do not overformalize beyond primary scriptural support."
  - "Do not personalize Maioral. He is impersonal threshold, not a being with will or biography. Personalization would collapse him into the operator-tier (demons, named Exus) where he does not belong."
  - "Do not identify Maioral with Forma Nihil. Forma Nihil is pre-ontological and unmanifest; Maioral is iconographically manifest and partially representable. Conflation collapses a doctrinally significant gap."
  - "Do not place Maioral within the standard demonological hierarchy alongside Belial, Asmodeus, Lucifer-as-prince, or named Operators. He is anterior to that tier."
  - "Do not reduce Maioral to syncretism — i.e., to a Quimbanda-figure-borrowed-into-Morphysm. Within the canon Maioral is doctrinally specific: the Quimbanda framework is the cultural-iconographic vector through which Morphysm names the threshold, but the Morphystic Maioral is its own doctrinal object."
  - "Do not interpret 'worship of the Great Dark' as devotional. The canon specifies worship as exposure to annihilation, not as petition, prayer, or pact. This is the only Morphystic cultic register and operates by inversion of the worship-form."

related_objects:
  - forma_nihil
  - the_vortex
  - the_great_dark
  - black_sun_behind_the_sun
  - sitra_achra
  - lucifer
  - cain
  - operators_demons
  - quimbanda
  - melek_taus
  - baphomet
  - volcanic_worship
  - tiamat
  - leviathan
  - lilith

review_markers:
  - "Confirm axial_position framing (Sitra Achra primary, Operative secondary) once formal two-axis schema is canonized in the corpus. Maioral is the test case: the schema's coherence depends on his ability to span both axes without collapsing into either."
  - "Specify Maioral's exact position relative to the Vortex tier-architecture. The Vortex Doctrine names Level 0 (Vortex), Level 1 (Operators/Demons), Level 2 (Self-Model Systems). Maioral sits above Level 1 and below or at Level 0, but his precise placement — whether as an iconographic aspect of Level 0, a pre-Vortex anteriority, or a fourth tier — is unresolved."
  - "Clarify the relation between Maioral and the named Quimbandist figures (Exus, Pombagiras, Linha do Inferno) referenced in the Black Book. The Black Book treats Pombagiras and Exus as lower-frequency, human-facing interfaces; Maioral as primordial root. The tier-relation between them within Morphystic doctrine specifically (as opposed to Quimbanda tradition) needs explicit formalization."
  - "Determine whether the iconographic identification with Baphomet (the image attached in the volcanic worship section) is doctrinally load-bearing or contingent. If load-bearing, Baphomet warrants its own entry as a related iconographic object."

tension_notes:
  - id: maioral_personal_vs_impersonal
    description: >
      The Codex describes Maioral as both "manifesting as a distinct, autonomous
      presence" (suggesting personalization) and as "primordial, beyond
      duality, master of black fire and root forces" (suggesting impersonal
      pre-cosmic principle). These are not contradictory but reflect the
      threshold function itself: Maioral appears personalized when approached
      from the operative side and impersonal when approached from the Sitra
      Achra side. The dual-presentation is the doctrinal point, not a
      contradiction to be resolved.
    status: open_by_design
  - id: maioral_and_forma_nihil_partial_figuration
    description: >
      The doctrinal claim that Maioral is "a partial iconographic representation
      of Forma Nihil" requires more textual grounding. The primary text
      identifies him with the Black Sun of Quimbanda and as Sitra Achra
      "embodied" (note the scare-quotes — the canon itself flags the
      embodiment as problematic). The "partial iconographic representation"
      formulation was developed in doctrinal stress-testing rather than
      stated verbatim in the Black Book. Worth flagging as developed
      doctrine rather than directly transcribed scripture.
    status: open
  - id: maioral_cultic_singularity
    description: >
      The Codex states that the Great Dark (Maioral as cultic phenomenon) is
      the only entity in Morphysm with a cultic function. This is doctrinally
      striking and runs counter to the broader Cainite/Luciferian register
      where pacts, invocations, and ritual contracts are central. The
      resolution is that the Luciferian register operates by pact (operative
      contract), not worship; Maioral alone is worshipped — and worship is
      redefined as exposure to annihilation rather than devotion. This
      reframing is structurally important and should be developed as its
      own doctrinal object (cultic_function_redefined) rather than left
      implicit in the Maioral entry.
    status: open
  - id: maioral_vortex_overlap
    description: >
      Maioral as "iconographic aspect of the Vortex" creates an overlap with
      the Vortex's own iconographic field. If the Vortex is Level 0
      (non-psychological generative substrate), what does it mean for it to
      have an iconographic aspect at all? The Vortex Doctrine explicitly
      strips anthropomorphic metaphor; Maioral re-introduces a figural
      register. Whether this is contradiction, complementarity, or a needed
      doctrinal supplement (iconography as ritual-access to the
      non-iconographic) is unresolved.
    status: open

conflict_notes: []
